BIOTECHNOLOGY: THE USE
OF BIOLOGICAL ORGANISMS
AND PROCESSES TO
PROVIDE USEFUL PRODUCTS
IN INDUSTRY
AND MEDICINE.
IT HAS BEGUN TO AFFECT
SO MANY ASPECTS
OF OUR 21ST
CENTURY LIVES.
BIOTECHNOLOGY APPLICATIONS
CAN BE SEEN IN AGRICULTURE,
PHARMACEUTICAL DEVELOPMENT,
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING,
AND EVEN THE
HUMAN GENOME.
THE USE OF THIS TECHNOLOGY
EXPANDS AND GROWS EACH DAY.
BUT WHAT EXACTLY
IS BIOTECHNOLOGY?
HOW DOES IT AFFECT
EVERYDAY LIFE?
WHERE WILL IT TAKE
US IN THE FUTURE?
BIOTECHNOLOGY IN THE 21ST
CENTURY WILL HELP DE-MYSTIFY
THIS SEEMINGLY LIMITLESS AND
VITAL SCIENCE BY PROVIDING
CONCRETE ANSWERS TO
THESE IMPORTANT QUESTIONS.
LIFE ON PLANET EARTH
ALL STARTED WITH A BANG.
FROM A SINGLE POINT
OF COMPRESSED MATTER
TO THE VAST AND INFINITE
DEPTHS OF SPACE AND TIME,
MILLIONS OF YEARS OF
EVOLUTION AND GROWTH
HAVE LED SCIENTISTS
TO THE DISCOVERY
OF THE BASIS OF
ALL LIFE: THE CELL.
BUT IT IS INSIDE
THE CELL ITSELF
WHERE THE TRULY
REMARKABLE THINGS HAPPEN.
IN ORDER TO
UNDERSTAND THE GENOME
WE MUST FIRST
UNDERSTAND DNA.
SHORTHAND FOR
DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID,
DNA IS WHAT
SCIENTISTS CALL
THE BUILDING
BLOCKS OF ALL LIFE.
INSIDE EACH CELL OF AN
ORGANISM IS THE NUCLEUS,
AND THE NUCLEUS CONTAINS THE
CELL'S CHROMOSOMES AND DNA.
DNA IS A LONG, STRING-LIKE
MOLECULE THAT HOLDS A SIMPLE
BUT IMPORTANT INFORMATIONAL
CODE USED TO DIRECT THE CELL
TO PERFORM
CERTAIN FUNCTIONS.
WE'VE KNOWN FOR OVER
A HUNDRED YEARS NOW
THAT THERE'S SOMETHING
INSIDE THE NUCLEUS,
OR THE CENTER, OF EVERY
CELL IN THE HUMAN BODY
AND OTHER CELLS IN
OTHER ORGANISMS,
EVEN BACTERIA,
THAT CODES FOR LIFE.
THE IDEA OF DNA,
DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID
HAS BEEN AROUND NOW FOR
SOME 50 OR 60 OR 70 YEARS.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
YOU AND ME IS ACTUALLY
A SMALL NUMBER, A RELATIVELY
SMALL NUMBER OF BASES
WITHIN THAT STRAND OF
DNA THAT WE BOTH CARRY.
ALL OF OUR CELLS HAVE THE
SAME, OR MOSTLY THE SAME,
DNA, BUT BETWEEN
TWO INDIVIDUALS
THERE'S A REMARKABLY SMALL
NUMBER OF DIFFERENCES.
A GENOME IS THE ENTIRE DNA IN AN
ORGANISM, INCLUDING ITS GENES.
GENES CARRY INFORMATION
FOR MAKING ALL THE PROTEINS
REQUIRED BY
THE ORGANISM.
THESE PROTEINS DETERMINE
HOW THE ORGANISM WILL LOOK,
HOW WELL ITS BODY METABOLIZES
FOOD OR FIGHTS INFECTION,
AND SOMETIMES
EVEN HOW IT BEHAVES.
THE GENOME IS
ESSENTIALLY THE SEQUENCE
OF ALL THE DNA OF A
SPECIES, LIKE HUMANS,
AND THE IDENTIFICATION OF THE
GENES WITHIN THAT SEQUENCE.
DOGS AND CATS AND
RATS ALL HAVE GENOMES.
THAT'S THAT STRING OF DNA THAT
MAKES UP ALL THE CHROMOSOMES
IN THE NUCLEUS
OF ALL OUR CELLS.
IT CODES FOR WHO WE ARE, WHAT WE
ARE, HAS ALL THE INFORMATION
FROM THE PAST ABOUT OUR
PARENTS AND GRANDPARENTS,
AND IT'S REALLY THE SECRET
TO CODING FOR THE PROTEINS,
CODING FOR THE MACHINERY
THAT CREATE THE CELLS
AND THE TISSUES AND THE
ORGANS THAT LIFE EMERGES FROM.
GENOMES ARE A REALLY
SIMPLE CONCEPT.
IT'S THE SETS OF CHROMOSOMES
IN THE NUCLEUS OF YOUR CELLS.
YOU RECEIVED ONE SET OF
CHROMOSOMES FROM YOUR MOTHER,
ONE SET FROM YOUR FATHER,
SO IT'S THE CONSTITUENT
BOTH SETS THAT
COMPRISE THE GENOME.
THE OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY
SUGGESTS THAT THE TERM "GENOME"
MAY BE A COMBINATION OF THE
WORDS "GENE" AND "CHROMOSOME".
BUT SCIENTISTS NOW KNOW THAT THE
GENOME IS MUCH MORE THAN THAT.
HOW GENOMICS STARTED
AS A FIELD OF SCIENCE
IS RELATED TO THE CREATION
OF A BIOTECHNOLOGY
INDUSTRY CAPABILITY
CALLED DNA SEQUENCING.
THAT CAPABILITY TO MEASURE THE
GENOME, TO SEQUENCE THE DNA,
IS CALLED "GENOMICS".
GENOMICS IS THE
STUDY OF THE GENOME.
SO IT IS UNDERSTANDING
CHROMOSOME STRUCTURE,
IT'S UNDERSTANDING HOW GENES
ARE ALIGNED ON THE CHROMOSOME,
HOW THE CHROMOSOME FIBERS
ARE PACKED AROUND PROTEINS,
HOW ALL OF THE BIOLOGY
SURROUNDING THE GENETIC
MATERIAL IN THE NUCLEUS
OF YOUR CELLS BEHAVES,
AND FROM A
BIOLOGICAL SENSE.
IN 1990, THE ADVANCEMENTS IN
GENOMICS AND THE STUDY OF GENES
LED SCIENTISTS TO ONE
OF THE MOST IMPORTANT
RESEARCH ENDEAVORS
IN HISTORY:
THE HUMAN GENOME PROJECT IS
BASICALLY A LARGE CATALOGING
OF ALL THE DNA SEQUENCE
OF A HUMAN BEING.
BASICALLY LOOKING AT
ALL THE CHROMOSOMES,
SEQUENCING THEM AND
THEN MAKING AN INDEX.
EVERY GENE IN YOUR BODY
THAT'S RESPONSIBLE FOR
HOW TALL YOU ARE,
HOW FAST YOU RUN,
WHAT COLOR YOUR NAILS ARE,
HOW FAST YOUR HEART BEATS,
EVERY GENE THAT'S
RESPONSIBLE FOR A FUNCTION
WAS IDENTIFIED
IN THIS PROJECT.
BY FIRST SEQUENCING
AN AVERAGE PERSON
AND THEN GOING THROUGH AND
BEING ABLE TO FIND GENES
IN THAT AVERAGE PERSON
WE CAN BEGIN TO STUDY
THEIR EFFECT AND THEIR
PURPOSE IN THE BODY.
BY IDENTIFYING, OR SEQUENCING,
EACH HUMAN GENOME,
SCIENTISTS HOPE TO
TAKE AN IN-DEPTH LOOK
AT THE FUNCTION
OF THE GENES.
STUDYING DIFFERENCES OR
MUTATIONS WITHIN THE GENES,
THEY REVEAL THE CAUSES
OF DISEASES LIKE CANCER
AND AID IN THE DEVELOPMENT
OF POTENTIAL TREATMENTS.
THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN YOU AND
ME - MY GENETICS, MY INHERITANCE
OF GENES IS DIFFERENT FROM YOURS
AS WELL, AND THAT CERTAINLY
DOES PREDISPOSE ME FOR
CERTAIN DISEASES MORE THAN YOU
AND YOU FOR CERTAIN
DISEASES MORE THAN ME.
AND ONCE WE FIND THOSE
DIFFERENCES - AND IT SOUNDS
LIKE A SIMPLE PROCESS BUT
IT'S A VERY COMPLEX ONE
- ONCE WE FIND
THOSE DIFFERENCES
WE CAN START ASKING
QUESTIONS LIKE "WHY?"
WHY DO THOSE DIFFERENCES
MAKE A DIFFERENCE
IN TERMS OF
DEVELOPMENT OF CANCER?
NOW THAT WE HAVE A BASE LINE
OF WHAT THE GENOME LOOKS LIKE,
IT'S MUCH EASIER TO LOOK AT
DISEASE STATES, SAY CANCER,
AND FIND OUT IF THERE HAVE BEEN
BREAKS IN PARTS OF THE GENOMES
AND THE PIECES WERE PUT BACK
TOGETHER IN A MIXED UP SENSE.
SO YOU CAN SEE KIND OF
WHAT THE UNDERLYING REASONS
THAT SOME OF THESE
CANCERS ARE OCCURRING.
IT HELPS US UNDERSTAND
DOWNSTREAM WHERE THE
PROTEIN'S MALFUNCTIONING,
WHAT ARE THE PROBLEMS.
SO THE HOPE WAS THAT IF
WE DEFINED WHAT GENES
WERE RESPONSIBLE FOR WHAT
FUNCTIONS WE COULD THEN
EASILY IDENTIFY WHEN
SOMETHING WAS AWRY.
SO IF A NORMAL PERSON WHO WAS
NOT PREDISPOSED TO ANY DISEASES
THAT WE KNOW OF, SUCH AS
DIABETES, IF THAT PERSON'S
GENOME WAS COMPARED WITH A
PERSON WHO WAS PREDISPOSED
TO AN INHERITABLE DISEASE,
THEN WE COULD IDENTIFY
WHAT PART OF THE GENE
WAS ABERRANT OR NOT
FUNCTIONING PROPERLY AND
THEN TREAT THOSE DISEASES.
AND IT GOES BEYOND
CANCER TO OTHER DISEASES.
DIABETES IS AN AREA THAT'S
VERY ACTIVE IN LOOKING AT WHAT
CAUSES DIABETES - PARTICULARLY
THINGS LIKE JUVENILE ONSET
WHICH IS A
GENETIC DISEASE.
BUT WHEN WE REALLY LOOK
IN MICROSCOPIC DETAIL
AT THE DNA TO UNDERSTAND
THE GENES WE FIND OUT
THAT THERE'S A LOT OF
VARIATION IN THE GENES
HAVING TO DO WITH MUTATIONS,
HAVING TO DO WITH SPLICING
OF THE GENES TO ONE ANOTHER
AND DIFFERENT KINDS OF
COPYING OF THE GENES AND
DIFFERENT KINDS OF IMPRINTING
FROM THE ENVIRONMENT
AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
THAT THE COMPLEXITY OF
UNDERSTANDING THE GENOME
IS SIGNIFICANT, BUT THE REWARDS
OF STUDYING THE GENOME
TO TRY TO UNDERSTAND THE
DIVERSITY AND ITS COMPLEXITY
CAN BENEFIT SOCIETY
IN UNDERSTANDING
HEALTH AND DISEASE.
IT'S REALLY ENDLESS WHAT
WE CAN DO WITH GENOMICS
IF WE STUDY IT
APPROPRIATELY.
ONE OF THE MOST PROMISING
DEVELOPMENTS TO COME FROM
THE STUDY OF HUMAN GENES
AND PROTEINS HAS BEEN
THE IDENTIFICATION OF
POTENTIAL NEW DRUGS
FOR THE TREATMENT
OF DISEASE.
PROTEOMICS IS THE STUDY
OF PROTEIN EXPRESSION
AS IT RELATES TO HUMAN
DISEASES AND NORMAL FUNCTION.
MANY HAVE PROPOSED THAT BY
STUDYING THE HUMAN GENOME
AND THE EXPRESSION
OF THOSE GENES
WE CAN AFFECT
HUMAN DISEASE.
PROTEOMICS IS
SIMILAR TO GENOMICS.
YOU MIGHT NOTICE THAT
THERE'S THIS "OMICS"
AT THE END OF GENOMICS
AND PROTEOMICS.
GENOMICS
MEASURES THE GENES.
PROTEOMICS MEASURES
THE PROTEINS
AND BY USING
PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS
WE CAN UNDERSTAND HOW
THE PROTEINS ARE CHANGED
AND MODIFIED AND LINKED
TOGETHER AND INTERACT
SO WE CAN UNDERSTAND THE
BASIC MACHINERY OF A CELL.
SO PROTEOMICS AND GENOMICS ARE
REALLY QUITE LINKED TOGETHER.
IN ORDER TO UNDERSTAND
PROTEINS BETTER,
LET'S TAKE ANOTHER
LOOK AT OUR DNA STRAND.
DNA CONTAINS INFORMATION TO
MAKE EVERY PART OF OUR BODIES.
EACH OF OUR THOUSANDS OF GENES
CODES FOR A SPECIFIC PART.
RNA, A TYPE OF NUCLEIC
ACID, WORKS TO TRANSFER
THE INFORMATION USED
TO BUILD PROTEINS.
BUT WHILE DNA STAYS INSIDE THE
NUCLEUS, A TYPE OF RNA CALLED
"MESSENGER RNA" COPIES THE
INFORMATION IN THE GENE
AND TRAVELS OUT
TO THE CYTOPLASM.
THERE, A PROTEIN MAKING
MACHINE CALLED A "RIBOSOME"
WILL READ THE RNA TO
MAKE A PARTICULAR PROTEIN.
PART OF THE RNA MOLECULE
CODES FOR AN AMINO ACID.
PROTEINS ARE MADE
FROM AMINO ACIDS.
ONCE THE AMINO ACIDS ARE
COMBINED IN A SPECIFIC WAY
WITH THE LANGUAGE OF DNA
AND RNA, A PROTEIN IS CREATED.
SOME PROTEINS FORM STRUCTURES
LIKE TEETH, HAIR, AND SKIN.
OTHERS CAN CREATE SENSES BY
BEING CODED TO READ LIGHT,
SOUND, OR FLAVOR.
WE STUDY HOW THOSE
PROTEINS ARE MANUFACTURED
AND SECRETED AND THE
FUNCTIONS THAT THEY
PROMOTE WITHIN
AND WITHOUT THE CELL.
WHEN YOU LOOK AT PROTEINS,
THOSE ARE THE THINGS
WHICH OUR
BODIES RUN ON.
THAT'S THE CHEMISTRY
THAT MAKES US HAPPEN
IS PROTEIN-PROTEIN
INTERACTIONS.
WE ARE NOTHING OTHER
THAN PROTEIN INTERACTIONS.
SO IN PROTEOMICS THERE ARE
VASTLY COMPLEX WAYS THAT WE
MEASURE THE AMOUNT OF A NUMBER
OF PROTEINS PRESENT IN THE BODY.
PROTEOMICS CAN ANALYZE WHAT
MAKES EACH HUMAN'S GENES
DIFFERENT FROM ONE ANOTHER
ON A CELLULAR LEVEL.
THESE DIFFERENCES, CALLED
"SINGLE NUCLEOTIDE
POLYMORPHISMS" ARE WHAT
SCIENTISTS ARE NOW STUDYING
IN ORDER TO BETTER
UNDERSTAND DISEASE.
SINGLE NUCLEOTIDE
POLYMORPHISMS ARE
CHANGES IN THE GENOME,
AND WHEN YOU ANALYZE
USING VERY SOPHISTICATED
TECHNIQUES YOU CAN IDENTIFY
"SNIPS" - SINGLE NUCLEOTIDE
POLYMORPHISMS ARE ALSO CALLED
"SNIPS"; IT'S EASIER TO SAY.
IN CANCER SNIPS HAVE BEEN
UTILIZED TO START TO DEVELOP
NONPROTEIN BASED
BIOMARKERS TO WHAT
PARTICULAR TYPE OF DISEASE
CANCER YOU HAVE, WHETHER
YOU'LL BE SUSCEPTIBLE
TO CERTAIN TREATMENTS.
ONE OF THE UNTOLD STORIES
IN HUMAN HEALTH IS THAT
OUR CELLS KNOW WHEN
THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO DIE.
WELL, IF THEY LOSE THIS ABILITY,
WHICH IS POSSIBLE WITH THE
SINGLE NUCLEOTIDE
POLYMORPHISM, YOU HAVE CANCER.
FOR MANY YEARS THERE'S BEEN AN
UNDERSTANDING THAT CANCERS BEGIN
OFTENTIMES BECAUSE THERE'S
A MUTATION IN A SIGNIFICANT
CONTROL PROTEIN THAT
RESULTS IN ALTERED CELL GROWTH
AND OFTENTIMES IT IS AN
UNCONTROLLED CELL GROWTH.
MOST OF THE TIME WE HAVE
PROCESSES WITHIN THE CELL
THAT ARE SELF-CHECKING AND
CAUSE THE CELL TO GO THROUGH
PROCESSES OF CELL DEATH AND
MOST CANCERS GO UNDETECTED
BECAUSE THEY ARISE AND
THE CHECKS AND BALANCES
IN OUR CELLS NATURALLY CAUSE
THE CANCEROUS CELL TO DIE.
OCCASIONALLY YOU GET A
MUTATION THAT GOES UNDETECTED
AND STARTS TO GROW.
THEN YOU GET AN ACCUMULATION
OF MUTATIONS IN A CELL
AND THE CANCER BECOMES
EVEN MORE DIFFICULT.
AS THE LATEST APPLICATIONS
OF PROTEOMICS AND GENOMICS
BEGIN TO EMERGE, IT SEEMS AS
THOUGH A MAJOR BREAKTHROUGH
IN DISEASE TREATMENT COULD
BE JUST BEYOND THE HORIZON.
GENOMICS AND PROTEOMICS
HOLD A GREAT DEAL OF POTENTIAL
AND HAVE ALREADY
HELPED US UNDERSTAND
IN FUNDAMENTALLY NEW
WAYS MANY DISEASES.
IN CANCER, FOR EXAMPLE, GENOMIC
AND BIOINFORMATICS ANALYSIS
HAVE HELPED US TO IDENTIFY
GENES THAT ARE DIRECTLY
RELATED TO THE CAUSE OF
CANCER, LIKE THE B53 GENE
OR THE BRCA GENES FOR
BREAST CANCER AND OTHERS.
THESE ARE THINGS WE'VE STARTED
TO RESEARCH AND UNDERSTAND
BY USING BIOINFORMATICS IN
COLLABORATION WITH GENOMICS
AND GENETICS WHICH IS LOOKING
FOR DIFFERENCES AND MUTATIONS
BETWEEN INDIVIDUALS AND TRY
TO PIECE THEM TOGETHER TO
CONSTRUCT THE WHOLE STORY OF
WHAT'S CAUSING THESE CANCERS.
FROM THAT EVENTUALLY
WE MAY BE ABLE TO ALTER
OR FIX THE MUTATIONS
THAT ARE CAUSING THESE
IN ORDER TO PREVENT
THE ONSET OF CANCER.
BUT AT A MINIMUM RIGHT NOW IF
WE KNOW SOMEBODY'S PREDISPOSED
- WHETHER THEY SHOW IT IN
THEIR FAMILY HISTORY OR NOT -
THEY KNOW THEY'RE PREDISPOSED
FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF CANCER,
THAT MAY SUGGEST
CERTAIN LIFESTYLE CHANGES
THEY MAY
WANT TO TAKE.
TYPE 2 DIABETES WAS JUST
AN EPIDEMIC IN THIS COUNTRY
WITH MORE THAN 30
MILLION PEOPLE SUFFERING.
SO WHAT THE GOAL OFTEN IS, IS TO
UNDERSTAND THE COMPLEX DISEASE,
UNDERSTAND THE GENETICS, USE
PROTEOMICS TO FIND THE MARKERS
BUT HAVE THAT INFORMATION
PROVIDE US, FRANKLY, INFORMATION
ABOUT THE SEVERITY OF THE
DISEASE, HOW IT FITS IN WITH OUR
FAMILY AND WHERE WE CAME FROM,
AND GIVES US A WAY TO WORK
TO PREVENT, WORK TO INTERVENE
EARLY, AND WORK TO REVERSE
THE LONG-TERM CHRONIC DISEASE
PROCESS THAT OFTEN FACES US.
WE KNOW HOW
TO KILL A CELL.
WHETHER IT'S A CANCEROUS
CELL OR A NORMAL CELL,
WE PRETTY MUCH
KNOW HOW TO KILL IT.
THE QUESTION IS CAN WE
KILL IT WITHOUT KILLING
ALL THE CELLS
THAT SURROUND IT?
SO AS WE DEVELOP SMARTER
DRUGS AND USE NANOTECHNOLOGY
AND BIOTECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS
TO DO THAT, WE CAN TREAT,
HOPEFULLY, ANY CANCER
AT ANY STAGE IN ANY BODY.
THAT WOULD BE A
REAL NICE THING.
ONCE THE RESEARCH IS
COMPLETE, WHAT'S NEXT?
WHAT DO RESEARCHERS DO WITH
ALL THIS NEW INFORMATION?
ONE OF THE BIGGEST CHALLENGES
IN PROTEOMICS AND GENOMICS
AND ALL THE OTHER SCIENCES
THAT END WITH "OMICS"
HAS TO DO WITH THE ENORMOUS
AMOUNT OF DATA THAT'S CREATED.
THE HUMAN GENOME, TO
GIVE YOU AN EXAMPLE,
HAS THREE AND A HALF
BILLION BASE PARENTS OF DNA.
AND SO WHEN WE MEASURE
THAT WITH THE NEW SEQUENCING
DEVICES WE GET UP TO A
TERABYTE OR MORE OF DATA.
A TERABYTE IS A
THOUSAND GIGABYTES.
BIOINFORMATICS IS BASICALLY
BEING ABLE TO TAKE LARGE AMOUNTS
OF BIOLOGICAL INFORMATION,
WHETHER IT BE PROTEINS OR EVEN
LOOKING AT THE ECOLOGY, AND
BEING ABLE TO CATEGORIZE IT
AND SIFT THROUGH A LOT OF
THE DATA WITH COMPUTERS
AND COME UP WITH
COMMONALITIES.
THE ONLY WAY IT CAN BE DONE IS
WITH A LOT OF COMPUTER POWER.
IT'S TAPPING INTO THE DATA,
IT'S ANALYZING THAT DATA
WITH COMPUTERS, IT'S
RELATING THAT ANALYSIS
TO OTHER ANALYSES THAT
ARE DONE WITH COMPUTERS.
THAT'S WHAT
BIOINFORMATICS IS ABOUT.
IT'S CLEAR THAT YOU CAN'T
DO GENOMICS OR PROTEOMICS
WITHOUT THE BIOINFORMATICS
AND COMPUTING TO SUPPORT IT.
TO PUT IT SIMPLY, BIOINFORMATICS
USES COMPUTERS TO SIFT THROUGH
MASSIVE AMOUNTS OF
SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION.
IT THEN CROSS REFERENCES ALL OF
THIS DATA IN HOPES OF FINDING
COMMONALITIES OR PATTERNS THAT
COULD SIGNIFY NEW DISCOVERIES.
WE CAN USE BIOINFORMATICS TO
HELP US DETERMINE WHETHER
WE'RE SUSCEPTIBLE TO VARIOUS
CANCERS OR OTHER DISEASES,
AS AN EXAMPLE.
IN SOCIETY AT LARGE WE
CAN USE BIOINFORMATICS
TO HELP THE POLICE FIGURE
OUT WHO DID A CRIME.
WE CAN USE BIOINFORMATICS TO
HELP MEASURE THE HEALTH EFFECTS
OF EXHAUST COMING OUT
OF CARS ON THE FREEWAYS.
ALL OF THIS CAN BE
INFORMED BY APPLYING
BIOINFORMATICS
ANALYSIS.
A LOT OF CANCERS, ONCE
THEY'RE REMOVED SURGICALLY,
THE NEXT STEP IS TO
DECIDE WHAT NEXT?
DO WE WAIT
AND WATCH?
DO WE GIVE TREATMENT TO TRY AND
PREVENT A RECURRENCE OF CANCER?
THAT'S A MORE DIFFICULT QUESTION
THAN IT MIGHT APPEAR BECAUSE
A LOT OF CANCER TREATMENTS
ARE VERY DIRE, VERY DIFFICULT,
SO YOU HAVE THIS DIFFICULT
DECISION TO MAKE.
SO THE TESTS WE'RE WORKING
ON FROM ANALYZING THIS DATA
ARE DESIGNED TO ADD
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
TO HELP MAKE
THESE DECISIONS.
SO, FOR EXAMPLE, IF I
WAS UNFORTUNATE ENOUGH
TO HAVE LIVER CANCER, MY
CANCER WOULD BE UNIQUE TO ME
AND EACH PATIENT'S
WOULD BE UNIQUE TO THEM.
HOWEVER, YOU CAN APPLY
THE TOOLS OF BIOINFORMATICS
TO EXAMINE EXPRESSION
OF MANY GENES ACROSS
ALL OF THE GENOME AND
COMPARE MULTIPLE PATIENTS
AND YOU BEGIN TO
GET INFORMATION
AND SO BIOINFORMATICS
IS REALLY CHANGING
THE WAY IN WHICH CANCERS
ARE BEING TREATED TODAY.
WE KNOW THAT ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
TENDS TO RUN IN FAMILIES...
AND SO MANY DISEASES
RUN IN FAMILIES.
BUT IT JUST HASN'T TURNED
OUT TO BE THAT SIMPLE
TO UNDERSTAND HOW THE
GENES ARE PASSED THROUGH
AND WHAT THE EFFECT
OF THE ENVIRONMENT IS.
AND BIOINFORMATICS ANALYSIS
AND GENOMICS AND PROTEOMICS
ANALYSIS ARE HELPING US TO
UNRAVEL WHAT'S GOING ON
IN THE PROGRESSION
OF ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE.
AND ALZHEIMER'S, LIKE MANY
DISEASES, LIKE DIABETES AND
OTHER DISEASES, ARE WHAT
WE CALL COMPLEX DISEASES.
THEY'RE NOT JUST
CAUSED BY ONE GENE,
THEY'RE CAUSED BY THE
COMBINATION OF MANY GENES
INTERACTING WITH
THE ENVIRONMENT.
AND SO WE ARE USING COMPUTERS
AND MODELING AND ANALYSIS
TO UNDERSTAND WHAT WE
CALL COMPLEX DISEASES
THAT HAVE MANY
GENETIC CONTRIBUTIONS.
THE CRUCIAL ELEMENT
IS TO TAKE ALL THIS DATA
AND EXTRACT SOMETHING
FROM IT AND THAT'S WHAT
THE COMPUTATIONAL PART
OF BIOINFORMATICS IS.
THAT'S WHY IT'S SUCH A
FASCINATING COMPUTER PROBLEM.
TO TAKE THIS HUGE AMOUNT OF DATA
WHICH IS CRITICALLY IMPORTANT
AND EXTRACT THE KEY FEATURES
WITH IT AND THEN TO WORK WITH
THE SCIENTISTS TO SAY
HERE'S WHAT WE FOUND,
CAN WE PUT IT
IN A CONTEXT?
DOES THAT LEAD US
TO OTHER QUESTIONS?
EVERYBODY TRIES TO LOOK FOR
THEIR OWN ANSWER, BUT WITH A
COMPUTER IT'S PURELY NUMBERS,
IT'S PURELY ONES AND ZEROS
ONCE IT'S ALL PUT IN AND SIFTED
THROUGH AND YOU DON'T HAVE THE
BIAS SO YOU CAN FIND UNKNOWN
CORRELATIONS THAT YOU WOULDN'T
HAVE THOUGHT TO LOOK FOR IF YOU
WERE JUST PUTTING PEN AND PENCIL
TO PAPER AND TRYING TO SIFT
THROUGH ALL THESE CHARTS.
SO IT HAS THE POTENTIAL
TO UNLOCK QUITE A FEW
UNKNOWN PATHWAYS WE
HADN'T SEEN BEFORE.
ACROSS THE GLOBE, SCIENTISTS,
DOCTORS, AND RESEARCHERS
HAVE DEDICATED THEIR PRACTICE
TO THE STUDY OF GENOMICS,
PROTEOMICS, AND
BIOINFORMATICS.
THROUGH THEIR STUDIES WE ARE
ABLE TO SEE BEYOND THE LIMITS
OF OUR OWN PHYSICALITY TO THE
VERY STRUCTURE OF LIFE ITSELF.
AND ONE DAY THEY MAY
MAKE THE DISCOVERY
THAT CHANGES
EVERYTHING.
THE 20TH CENTURY WAS ALL ABOUT
PHYSICS AND THE NUCLEAR AGE.
THE 21ST CENTURY IS ALL
ABOUT BIOLOGY, MEDICINE,
LIFE SCIENCES, BIOINFORMATICS,
GENOMICS, PROTEOMICS.
WHETHER WE WILL EVER
HAVE THE ABILITY TO GO IN
AND FIX A GENE IS - I MEAN,
EVER IS A LONG TIME.
I SUSPECT THE
ANSWER IS YES,
WE WILL EVER HAVE
THE ABILITY TO DO THAT.
HOW SOON THAT IS,
IS THE QUESTION.
IT'S AN INTERESTING FACT
THAT WHEN THE HUMAN GENOME
WAS SEQUENCED EVERYBODY
SAID, GREAT, SO TOMORROW
WE'LL HAVE NEW DRUGS TO
CURE ALL THESE DISEASES.
AND THERE WAS THIS PERIOD WHERE
THEY SAID, WELL, WHERE ARE THEY?
WE'RE FIVE YEARS ON, TEN YEARS
ON, WHATEVER, WHERE ARE THEY?
BUT PEOPLE HAVE TO REMEMBER
IT TAKES TEN OR 20 YEARS
TO GO FROM THE CONCEPT
OF A POSSIBLE DRUG
TO A DRUG THAT CAN BE
SAFELY SOLD TO PEOPLE.
AND SO WE ARE JUST NOW
CREEPING UP ON THAT TIMEFRAME
WHERE WE'LL START TO
SEE THE BENEFITS OF IT.
IT'S AN EVER CHANGING FIELD
AND THAT'S WHAT'S SO EXCITING
ABOUT IT, THAT YOU'RE
FINDING OUT NEW THINGS.
BEING A PHD, ONE OF THE
THINGS I'VE LEARNED IS THAT
IT'S MORE OF HOW
MUCH YOU DON'T KNOW.
AND THAT'S THE ENORMITY OF IT
IS HOW MUCH WE DON'T KNOW
AND WE'RE ALL WORKING
TO UNDERSTAND EVEN MORE.